feat: lazy + configurable LLM fallback chain (#1762)
airweave-ai/airweave: fern/docs/pages/search.mdx

## Response Format

All three tiers return the same `SearchV2Response` with a `results` array. See the [API Reference](/api-reference/collections/instant-search) for the full response schema and interactive examples.

## Configuring the LLM provider chain

> Classic and Agentic search call an LLM. Instant search does not — a backend with no LLM configured still answers instant queries, and Classic/Agentic return HTTP 503 until an API key is set. This section is only relevant to self-hosted deployments; the managed service ships with providers configured.

Reviewer: Might be better to move the callout to an [actual Fern callout](https://buildwithfern.com/learn/docs/writing-content/components/callouts), as this highlights it better.

```suggestion
<Callout intent="note" title="Self-hosted only">
  This section is only relevant to self-hosted deployments. The managed service ships with providers configured.
</Callout>

Classic and Agentic search call an LLM. Instant search does not — a backend with no LLM configured still answers instant queries, and Classic/Agentic return HTTP 503 until an API key is set.
```

### Default chain

> Out of the box Airweave tries providers in this order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Out of the box, Airweave tries providers in this order:
```

1. `together:zai-glm-5`
2. `anthropic:claude-sonnet-4.6`

> The first provider whose API key is set and that responds successfully handles the request. Subsequent entries are only tried on failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first provider with an API key set that responds successfully handles the request. Subsequent entries are tried only on failure.
```

### Setting API keys

Set at least one of the following environment variables on the backend:

| Env var | Provider |
|---|---|
| `TOGETHER_API_KEY` | Together |
| `ANTHROPIC_API_KEY` | Anthropic |
| `MISTRAL_API_KEY` | Mistral |
| `GROQ_API_KEY` | Groq |
| `CEREBRAS_API_KEY` | Cerebras |

If none are set, the backend boots normally; Classic/Agentic search return `503 Service Unavailable` with a message listing these variables.

### Overriding the chain

Set `LLM_FALLBACK_CHAIN` to a comma-separated list of `provider:model` pairs. Example:

```
LLM_FALLBACK_CHAIN=cerebras:gpt-oss-120b,anthropic:claude-sonnet-4.6
```

Supported providers: `cerebras`, `groq`, `anthropic`, `together`, `mistral`. The full list of models per provider lives in `backend/airweave/adapters/llm/registry.py`.

The parser validates three things at startup:

- Every provider is a known provider.
- Every model is a known model.
- Every `(provider, model)` combination exists in the registry (e.g. `together:mistral-large` is rejected because `mistral-large` is hosted on Mistral, not Together).

> Misconfiguration fails fast with an error that lists the accepted values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Misconfiguration is caught at startup with an error that lists the accepted values.
```

### Fallback semantics

- Providers without an API key are silently skipped when the chain is built.
- Providers whose initialization raises are logged and skipped.

> - If the resulting chain is empty, the backend wires a null LLM — instant search still works; classic/agentic return 503.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the resulting chain is empty, the backend wires a null LLM — instant search still works; Classic/Agentic return 503.
```
